David Schaich (he): Okay, you may well have already gotten underway, while I was getting everything set up and logging in all three times
David Schaich (he): to get to the Canvas site. But
David Schaich (he): today these computer labs are something new for this year, largely to give you an opportunity to work on that computer project
David Schaich (he): with me close to hand to
David Schaich (he): answer any questions or any difficulties that you come up with.
David Schaich (he): So I won't be saying too much, and won't need the doc-cam which this room doesn't have.
David Schaich (he): What
David Schaich (he): we'll be going through, just for a few minutes, is looking at that computer project assignment
David Schaich (he): and talking through some of the specifically python
David Schaich (he): pieces of it that
David Schaich (he): we can look at through this demo. my python notebook. where I should now be able to log in
David Schaich (he): Google collaboratory with just one more 2 factor
David Schaich (he): education check.
David Schaich (he): S0 0nce I'm in here i'll hop over to
David Schaich (he): and computer projects, and I can say just off the top of my head
David Schaich (he): before we are getting there, that there are 5 exercises in that assignment which is due in 2 weeks. So if you can get through the first 3 0f those.
David Schaich (he): either today or at home
David Schaich (he): on your own over the coming week. You'll be in good shape to wrap everything up
David Schaich (he): on that time scale.
David Schaich (he): and it is a fairly long
David Schaich (he): Pdf file the computer project assignments, and hopefully that Isn't too, intimidating. Given that
David Schaich (he): most of the exercises
David Schaich (he): have a bit of relevant background information
accompanying them.
David Schaich (he): You give you well everything that you need is to
David Schaich (he): complete the actual tasks. So the first bit of background, what we're going to be looking at
David Schaich (he): is nicely continuing yesterday's lecture on the discussion of random walks.
David Schaich (he): We will be looking at more interesting random walks where the step size taken at each tick of the clock in the walk
David Schaich (he): is no longer just
a fixed length, plus or minus one to the right or to the left.
David Schaich (he): but it's is drawn from some non-trivial probability distribution.
David Schaich (he): and we will do that drawing host
David Schaich (he): step lengths from
David Schaich (he): what are called pseudo-random number generators so using computer programming to generate
David Schaich (he): random step lengths according to some given distribution.
David Schaich (he): And we will look at 2 different distributions that have 2 different types of behavior.
David Schaich (he): One of them the
David Schaich (he): ordinary evolution that we went through yesterday.
David Schaich (he): and the other so-called anomalous diffusion that I
David Schaich (he): we'll say more about next week, just to split up the talking
David Schaich (he): and not have it all today.
David Schaich (he): But maybe the first thing to comment on is the pseudo in these pseudo-random numbers which arises from the fact that
David Schaich (he): all the computer programs that we work with and you will be writing are
David Schaich (he): deterministic. If you give them a fixed set of inputs, ask them to run. They will always give the same outputs, even if we want to incorporate some elements of randomness
David Schaich (he): into the task that the computer is doing for us.
David Schaich (he): So what computers provide are
David Schaich (he): imitations of truly random numbers, that at least for our purposes, are more than random enough for things like encryption and cryptography.
The
David Schaich (he): pseudo-random numbers that we'll be using are insufficient.
David Schaich (he): The idea is that
David Schaich (he): the computer is giving us some sequence of numbers
David Schaich (he): that appear random in the sense that
David Schaich (he): if we have some large number of elements in the sequence, we will not be able to predict the next element that the computer gives us, with very high probability of success.
David Schaich (he): And
David Schaich (he): this is maybe the good point to
David Schaich (he): hop over to that programming demo. And look at how this sort of thing
David Schaich (he): it's done in Python, and as one final introductory. No. Here
David Schaich (he): I will say that Python is
David Schaich (he): a programming language that i'm recommending just for
David Schaich (he): those of you who are getting started with programming.
David Schaich (he): If you are already familiar with some other programming language like Fortran
David Schaich (he): Matlab. See
David Schaich (he): Rust, there are many options You're free to use whatever you want. Just submit the corresponding code
David Schaich (he): along with the
David Schaich (he): answers to the exercises or the tasks in the project.
David Schaich (he): Python is nice because it is free.
David Schaich (he): It is very widely used. and it is very user friendly compared to some things like Fortran or C.
David Schaich (he): So this demo should have all the information that you need, even if you've never seen any sort of programming before for this project.
David Schaich (he): Starting off with
David Schaich (he): some of the setup for
David Schaich (he): getting started with a python program where some of Pythons flexibility and usefulness comes from the existence of a large number of
David Schaich (he): libraries or packages that can be imported into any given application.
David Schaich (he): This will and imports keyword at the start. and in particular we will need
David Schaich (he): It's pseudo-random number package called random.
David Schaich (he): along with a few others like numerical python. it has useful numerical
David Schaich (he): utilities and map Plot Lab makes it easy for
David Schaich (he): things to be plotted through python.
David Schaich (he): There's also a
David Schaich (he): way to use this import statement to set up
David Schaich (he): short nicknames for these packages that are being imported so numerical. Python we can call Np. And the map plot lib plotting package we can call.
and the patch mark in Python
David Schaich (he): declare that everything
David Schaich (he): on the end of that line from here to the end of the line of code. It's just a comment that makes things easier for humans to read, and the computer itself is going to ignore that entirely.
David Schaich (he): So I won't. Go through every detail of this demo, and please feel free to ask questions. Go ahead.
Nice.
David Schaich (he): Okay.
David Schaich (he): This is on
choice.
David Schaich (he): Yes.
David Schaich (he): and yeah, that
David Schaich (he): chances are
Yes.
David Schaich (he): So
they roll their needs for you.
David Schaich (he): So on the local issue
David Schaich (he): window. Come on. And I
Yeah.
David Schaich (he): it's.
David Schaich (he): Yeah, it looks like a very good place.
David Schaich (he): something you come before locally out there.
David Schaich (he): I'm curious if it is so
David Schaich (he): that they business
David Schaich (he): that.
David Schaich (he): And then see here.
David Schaich (he): say iphone
David Schaich (he): on your first.
David Schaich (he): All these windows systems are.
David Schaich (he): It was single
those days.
David Schaich (he): Not
I.
David Schaich (he): Thank you.
It
David Schaich (he): Yeah. So I don't want to.
David Schaich (he): If you have hopefully administrative.
it was there
David Schaich (he): and installated all right. No plan that all this should be
so far blind
David Schaich (he): task that I can try to do
David Schaich (he): right here at all.
David Schaich (he): Hello!
David Schaich (he): We can work on things like that.
David Schaich (he): There are other.
David Schaich (he): we'll let you
David Schaich (he): the contact just like the miracle iphone. and one time
David Schaich (he): done with this little introductory recording. I'll take a look and see if I can get a miracle pipe. I'm running on one of these systems myself.
David Schaich (he): Let you know how that goes.
David Schaich (he): but
David Schaich (he): the one thing to say about pseudo-random numbers is that
David Schaich (he): the next
David Schaich (he): code block here in this demo
David Schaich (he): we start off by
David Schaich (he): passing a seed to that random number generator
David Schaich (he): and given a fixed number as a seed.
David Schaich (he): the generator will produce the same sequence of pseudo-random numbers every time it is run starting from that seed. So
David Schaich (he): this is useful
because it allows
David Schaich (he): these calculations that require some elements of randomness to be verified and checked.
David Schaich (he): So you'll see in the computer project assignment that the seed is specified
and given that seed everyone should get
David Schaich (he): exactly the same numerical results. With some copyrights. We can see that pulling
David Schaich (he): a random number out of the
David Schaich (he): random number generator with this random random function call
David Schaich (he): that gives us a variable called you that we can print.
David Schaich (he): It is printed as point 8 6 3 0, etc.,
David Schaich (he): calling Random Random again, gives us the next random number in that sequence.
David Schaich (he): and that
David Schaich (he): does not overwrite you, which is still sticking around for later use. We can print it again.
David Schaich (he): Get the same number back just with some fancier formatting. Where?
David Schaich (he): Here I put in some formatting tags
David Schaich (he): that depend on these percentage signs.
David Schaich (he): and it's something you can copy, paste or look at it more detail through tutorials or Google searches depending on how frequently you want to format anything that you are printing.
David Schaich (he): The first
David Schaich (he): exercise in the project assignments
David Schaich (he): in is going to involve generating
David Schaich (he): hundreds of thousands of random numbers which would be tedious to do
David Schaich (he): one call the random at a time.
David Schaich (he): So in any programming framework want to be fundamental capabilities is what is called a for loop
David Schaich (he): that simply executes a fixed instruction or set of instructions.
David Schaich (he): a given number of times.
possibly with changes along the way.
David Schaich (he): and in python
David Schaich (he): a for loop is started
David Schaich (he): by a line that begins with 4. It ends with a colon.
David Schaich (he): and the loop lasts as long as the following lines are indented. They have white space at the start, either spaces or tabs.
David Schaich (he): This is unique to Python. Different programming languages. We'll implement for loops in different ways, but they will all
David Schaich (he): have them in some way, shape or form.
David Schaich (he): and what this loop is doing
David Schaich (he): is executing
David Schaich (he): all 3 0f these lines for every value of I ranging from 0
David Schaich (he): up to, and samples minus one.
David Schaich (he): and you're seeing that we are getting a random number with each of those iterations of this loop.
David Schaich (he): and what we are doing with it. Next to the
David Schaich (he): second exercise
David Schaich (he): in the project assignment, which I will
David Schaich (he): pull up to save it about it.
David Schaich (he): So
David Schaich (he): one thing I neglected to states up until now is that
David Schaich (he): that random random function is giving what's called a uniformly distributed random number.
David Schaich (he): So it is between 0 and one, a real number
David Schaich (he): with equal probability for any floating point number between
David Schaich (he): 0 and one. which is the typical
David Schaich (he): probability distribution that is being called by any given random number generator in any given language.
David Schaich (he): but it's a rather boring one, just getting
David Schaich (he): an equal sampling of numbers between 0 and one. rather than any of the interesting probability distributions that we want to
got it
David Schaich (he): investigates
David Schaich (he): and say non-trivial things about. They actually require numerical computing rather than being exactly solvable
David Schaich (he): approximately solvable by application of the central limit. Theorem.
David Schaich (he): So given this sort of uniform distribution that's drawn on the right in this little sketch. I, you
David Schaich (he): equal probability for all numbers u between 0 and one.
David Schaich (he): If we act on any given number coming out of that random number generator
David Schaich (he): with some function F. And take that to define a different random Number X. Then.
David Schaich (he): depending on the function F. That we choose, we can
David Schaich (he): engineer the probability, distribution P. Of X. That these transformed random numbers X.
David Schaich (he): Follow.
David Schaich (he): So is illustrated on the left, we could have some
David Schaich (he): regions. Dx.
David Schaich (he): In the accessible range of X. That have a greater probability of being sampled. Some regions that have a smaller probability of being sampled. So if you think of, for instance, a Gaussian
David Schaich (he): probability distribution.
David Schaich (he): you want to sample things around the peak of the Gaussian with an exponential suppression
David Schaich (he): as you g0 0ff into the tails.
David Schaich (he): Now, because
David Schaich (he): we want both of these uniform distributions and
David Schaich (he): the non-trivial P. Of X. Distribution to be well-defined probability distributions.
David Schaich (he): You want
David Schaich (he): the probability to be conserved, which is the statement that
David Schaich (he): the
David Schaich (he): infinitesimal elements P. Of U. D. U. Or P. Of x dx
David Schaich (he): should be equal
David Schaich (he): as we go. As we apply this transformation.
David Schaich (he): which in turn requires that it is a nice continuous, invertible well-behaved function.
David Schaich (he): and if we rearrange
David Schaich (he): this condition.
David Schaich (he): we find an expression for P. Of X. In terms of the relation between
David Schaich (he): the
David Schaich (he): infinitesimal region.
David Schaich (he): the U and the corresponding infinitesimal region. Dx.
David Schaich (he): Which we can recognize as the derivative Ddx
David Schaich (he): of you as a function of X or the inverse transform
David Schaich (he): that we started off with to define those X. So this procedure is known as inverse transform sampling.
David Schaich (he): and we can use it in 2 ways, and we will use it in 2 ways. In this project.
David Schaich (he): First we could be given the transform F of you, defining these X and figure out
David Schaich (he): from this relation
David Schaich (he): what the corresponding probability distribution is for those X, or we can go the other way. Say, there is some distribution that we want to target
David Schaich (he): and
David Schaich (he): engineer and appropriate transform
David Schaich (he): to do so. It's that second task that is being done in this demo we want
David Schaich (he): this probability. Distribution. P. Of X. Is x over 2
David Schaich (he): with X ranging from 0 up t0 2. So the integral over that full distribution adds up t0 100, as always.
David Schaich (he): But we have a higher probability of sampling larger x greater than one than we do
David Schaich (he): less than one. This is
David Schaich (he): how that distribution looks.
David Schaich (he): and it's a
David Schaich (he): what should be a straightforward check which you can do to make sure it all works out that the corresponding transform f of view producing the desire Distribution
David Schaich (he): is setting those X's
David Schaich (he): to be twice the square root of the uniformly distributed random numbers between 0 and one.
So that's what we're doing
David Schaich (he): in this for loop
David Schaich (he): collecting
David Schaich (he): a 100,000 samples of twice the square root of a uniformly distributed. Random number.
David Schaich (he): computing the
arithmetic mean the average of those numbers.
David Schaich (he): as well as the
David Schaich (he): average of the square of those numbers which gives us
David Schaich (he): the
David Schaich (he): the variance of that not trivial distribution, or at least an approximation to it
David Schaich (he): which we can check with those
David Schaich (he): 100,000 samples, comes out well within a of the exact results that should also be straightforward for you to calculate based on you give them
David Schaich (he): probability distribution.
David Schaich (he): So see how long those 100,000 samples take to run on
David Schaich (he): the Google Cloud
David Schaich (he): about 4.2 s. and we can also check that If we were to do just 5 samples rather than 10 to the 5,
David Schaich (he): we would have much larger
David Schaich (he): fluctuations in our arithmetic
David Schaich (he): results around the exact value for
David Schaich (he): t0 60%. Similarly, with
David Schaich (he): a larger number
David Schaich (he): of samples. so
David Schaich (he): say 10 million
David Schaich (he): rather than a 100,000.
David Schaich (he): It'll take
David Schaich (he): a 100 times longer to run so a few seconds, but should get
David Schaich (he): even more precisely of reproducing the exact result in agreement with that law of large numbers.
David Schaich (he): I won't say too much about the next block in this demo it's showing off
David Schaich (he): ways that both histograms and functions can be plotted in
David Schaich (he): python, and in particular plotted on top of each other.
David Schaich (he): as in this figure that is confirming that the
David Schaich (he): 100000 0r in this case the 10 million random numbers that we just generated do produce a histogram in blue
that matches the expected
David Schaich (he): probability distribution in red that we were targeting. So that's confirmation that the transform we figured out from that distribution is correct. Maybe the
David Schaich (he): last thing I will say for today is
David Schaich (he): getting into third exercise
a good target for
David Schaich (he): the coming week. Up until the next iteration of
David Schaich (he): this lab we will actually now use
David Schaich (he): random numbers distributed according to a non-trivial
David Schaich (he): probability distribution to carry out random walks that are more interesting.
David Schaich (he): The the P. And Q. Left right that we did
David Schaich (he): in class yesterday.
David Schaich (he): So, after some
David Schaich (he): analytic calculations based on the central limit, theorem.
David Schaich (he): the actual computing for a random walk is going to require
David Schaich (he): 2 0r 3
David Schaich (he): different levels of 4 leaves, all nested within each other.
David Schaich (he): and in the python code that corresponds to
David Schaich (he): in this case 3 different levels
David Schaich (he): of indentation.
So just to pick this apart
David Schaich (he): and
David Schaich (he): make sure that what's going on here is all clear for you to look at it. More detail on your own
David Schaich (he): for the remainder of the lab. What we're doing is first
David Schaich (he): looping over
David Schaich (he): different numbers, different lengths of this step. Sorry. Different numbers of steps in the walk different walk lines.
David Schaich (he): So, considering 8 different varieties.
First, a set of random walks, where we
David Schaich (he): take 10 steps and say it's done
next to set of random walks, where we take 20 steps and say it's done.
David Schaich (he): and s0 0n all the way up to
David Schaich (he): 80 steps.
David Schaich (he): and
David Schaich (he): for each of those different length walks we need to take the corresponding number of steps.
David Schaich (he): and in order to get a large number of repetitions to feed into
David Schaich (he): the law of large numbers and central limit theorem. we need to repeat each of those n step walks
David Schaich (he): some number of times that's specified in the project assignments, and here called, and blocks. which is a 100,000. So those are the 3
David Schaich (he): for us to go through every step in each walk.
David Schaich (he): every repetition
David Schaich (he): of walks, with a given number of steps.
David Schaich (he): and every number of steps
David Schaich (he): from the length of the walks that we are asked to
David Schaich (he): consider. And the reason we're looking at steps with different numbers of walks is to compare the average
David Schaich (he): length of that walk, the final position that we computed through the central limit theory of the law of diffusion yesterday.
David Schaich (he): and see how that average walk. Clients depends on them on the number of steps.
In this plot
David Schaich (he): it looks
David Schaich (he): recently linear
David Schaich (he): and numerical python. once it is available.
David Schaich (he): provides a
David Schaich (he): linear fit function
David Schaich (he): that can carry out a regression
David Schaich (he): to this data.
David Schaich (he): See how well it actually fits a straight line.
David Schaich (he): and also see
David Schaich (he): the parameters defining that straight line. It's, slope and intercept and confirm that those behave as expected the intercept
David Schaich (he): should go t0 0. When 0 steps are taken. we don't get very far without walking.
David Schaich (he): and the slope is related to the mean value, as we saw from the wall of diffusion yesterday.
David Schaich (he): So
David Schaich (he): I will stop talking. There.
David Schaich (he): Are there further questions before I take a look to see what can be done
David Schaich (he): on these machines about numerical python.
David Schaich (he): So at least, for now i'll
David Schaich (he): leave you to.
David Schaich (he): even though it's only been about 5 min. It looks like I've
David Schaich (he): crack down what can be used
David Schaich (he): on these windows, machines, and presumably the ones
David Schaich (he): in the library as well. So I
David Schaich (he): looks for anaconda and clicked on that anaconda
David Schaich (he): navigator which. when I was testing things
David Schaich (he): on
David Schaich (he): that computer right over there, it gave some options that have
David Schaich (he): available.
David Schaich (he): It is just taking a
David Schaich (he): minute or 2 to load.
David Schaich (he): I don't wish to
David Schaich (he): update. So here is at Anaconda navigator, which
is
David Schaich (he): basically a collection of lots of
David Schaich (he): useful tools. which I think that Command Exe prompt was the one
David Schaich (he): he jumped into just by accident from clicking the other anaconda on the list.
David Schaich (he): Jupiter notebooks should look a lot like
David Schaich (he): the Google Collaboratory. So if I, by launching that
David Schaich (he): this is open in Microsoft Edge
David Schaich (he): just because windows.
David Schaich (he): But
David Schaich (he): we make a new hey on screen notebook from that menu and try
David Schaich (he): pasting in the first block from that demo and run it.
David Schaich (he): And it is happy with dump high, and that pop live available so slightly different versions. Then the demo. But
they will still
David Schaich (he): worked perfectly well for
David Schaich (he): the project.
David Schaich (he): I think another option on here is
David Schaich (he): this spider, a scientific pipeline development environment.
David Schaich (he): which should also
David Schaich (he): provide numerical python map fault with, and many other packages that
David Schaich (he): we won't, need
David Schaich (he): I'll try it
David Schaich (he): tasting in actually, what i'll do is
David Schaich (he): get the
David Schaich (he): raw Python code that entire demo, all in one
David Schaich (he): file. And see I was built in windows. Jupiter Notebook
David Schaich (he): handles that so it prints pseudo random numbers. Prince. The histogram is computing
David Schaich (he): the random walks.
David Schaich (he): and I will also not take a tour
David Schaich (he): paste that entire demo
David Schaich (he): into the spider that came up from the anaconda navigator
David Schaich (he): and try executing that at the same time.
David Schaich (he): And there, indeed is the hit that
David Schaich (he): we ended up with through the cloud of the Google Laboratory, just running
David Schaich (he): on the local host
David Schaich (he): and over in Spider. Well, there, that is, as well
David Schaich (he): just take so few seconds to run. So
David Schaich (he): those are a few resources that can be used to stop these local machines without going to the cloud
David Schaich (he): and
David Schaich (he): machines in the
David Schaich (he): library and elsewhere on campus should
David Schaich (he): signed in but the attendance code that I have.
David Schaich (he): or
David Schaich (he): today i'll put up just at the top there. 1 5 0ne.
David Schaich (he): 2 2 6,
David Schaich (he): Yeah.
David Schaich (he): Rush to get it here and get all signed in. I forgot to
David Schaich (he): send that around.
David Schaich (he): S0 0ne question that came up just now related to
David Schaich (he): It's equation 2 in the
David Schaich (he): first exercise. With the counseling probability distribution. The question was whether
David Schaich (he): the use of ours that appear
David Schaich (he): in the sub. For both the arithmetic mean
David Schaich (he): and the
David Schaich (he): arithmetic need estimates of
David Schaich (he): that standard deviation. Sigma. whether these ares should be the same or should be generated separately. My answer was that
David Schaich (he): you should be the same fixed sequence of numbers on each of the 2 equations
in this expression.
David Schaich (he): and that is the same sort of thing that's being done. And this third block in the demo for the yeah
David Schaich (he): numbers are just being generated once with that single call to random random in the loop. and then multiple things are being done with them. Looking at both the
David Schaich (he): arithmetic, me at the average
David Schaich (he): and the arithmetic mean of the square. So that is a
David Schaich (he): good question to you. Clarify explicitly and hopefully. What I just
David Schaich (he): set was clear to everyone.
David Schaich (he): Resume the recording just for a couple of last comments that
David Schaich (he): in this line below equation one when I say that clearly it's a goal over
David Schaich (he): P. Of X. Equals one.
David Schaich (he): This X is referring to you the uniform distribution. That's all we're talking about. At this point.
David Schaich (he): I cannot fix that typo just to avoid it. Any confusion. and without any further questions today. The one comments i'll make
David Schaich (he): before shutting down. The recording is getting out of the computer lab.
David Schaich (he): Leave it for the next class coming in here is that
David Schaich (he): and for each of these 5 exercises, when I solve them myself. The computing that I needed ran in
David Schaich (he): less than a minute for each of them
David Schaich (he): on the Google Laboratory. And quicker than that.
David Schaich (he): just on my laptop. So that is something that you can look out for if you're seeing things running for it 1520 0r 2,000 min. Then it
David Schaich (he): chances are there's something going on in your code that
David Schaich (he): can be improved or corrected. So that's
David Schaich (he): something to keep an eye out for. I'm not asking you to do an enormous amount of large scale computational work that should be a matter of minutes what the code is in place to run.